Custom certificates (#701)
SUSE/doc-susemanager: modules/administration/pages/custom-ssl.adoc

[[custom-ssl]]
= Custom SSL Certificates

You can use custom certificates with {productname} and {productname} Proxy.

This section covers how to use a third party SSL certificate authority with a new {productname} installation, and replacing existing certificate with new custom certificates.

Before you begin, ensure you have:

* A certificate authority (CA) SSL public certificate
* An SSL private key

> * An SSL public certificate

Reviewer: I would name it more explicit "Server Certificate" and "Server Key".

Your key and certificate files must be in PEM format.

> The host name of the SSL keys and certificates must match the host name of the machine you deploy them on.

Reviewer: New RFCs more or less requires that the host name is configured in the "X509v3 Subject Alternative Name" Section of the Certificate. This is very technical but one of the typical problems of self generated Certificates.

In addition we could say that in that section you can also list multiple hostnames if the server has them.

Reviewer: Like below, we should say that hostnames in the certificates must be FQDNs

+
----
export CA_CERT=`path_to_CA_certificate_file`
export SERVER_KEY=`path_to_web_server_key`
export SERVER_CERT=`path_to_web_server_certificate`
----
. Complete {productname} setup:
+
----
yast2 susemanagersetup
----
+
When you are prompted for certificate details during setup, fill in random values.
The values will be overridden by the values you specified at the command prompt.

[NOTE]
====
Execute the [command]``yast2 susemanagersetup`` command from the same shell you exported the environment variables from.
====

== Custom Certificates for New Proxy Installations

By default, {productname} Proxy uses a self-signed certificate.
After you have completed the initial setup, you can replace the default certificate with a custom certificate.

.Procedure: Installing Custom Certificates on a New {productname} Proxy

. Install the {productname} Proxy according to the instructions in xref:installation:install-intro.adoc[].
. Complete the initial setup according to xref:installation:proxy-setup.adoc[].
. At the command prompt, run:
+
----
configure-proxy.sh
----
. At the ``Do you want to import existing certificates?`` prompt, type kbd:[y]
. Follow the prompts to complete setup.

> == Re-Create Existing Certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Re-Create Existing Server Certificates
```

> If your existing custom certificates have expired or stopped working for any reason, you can generate a new certificate from the existing CA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your existing custom certificates have expired or stopped working for any reason, you can generate a new server certificate from the existing CA.
```

> .Procedure: Re-Creating an Existing Certificate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure: Re-Creating an Existing Server Certificate
```

. On the {productname} Server, at the command prompt, regenerate the server certificate:
+
----
rhn-ssl-tool --gen-server --dir="/root/ssl-build" --set-country="COUNTRY" \
--set-state="STATE" --set-city="CITY" --set-org="ORGANIZATION" \
--set-org-unit="ORGANIZATION UNIT" --set-email="name@example.com" \
--set-hostname="susemanager.example.top" --set-cname="example.com"
----
Ensure that the [systemitem]``set-cname`` parameter is the fully-qualified domain name of your {productname} Server.
You can use the the [systemitem]``set-cname`` parameter multiple times if you require multiple aliases.
. Install the RPM that contains the newly generated certificate:
+
----

> rpm -Uhv /root/ssl-build/lnx0259a/rhn-org-httpd-ssl-key-pair-lnx0259a-1.0-2.noarch.rpm

Reviewer: The version/release number will be increased with every time you re-create the certificates.
Not sure if we need to tell that to our customers that they need to look for the latest version of the RPM?

----
. Restart services to pick up the changes:
+
----
spacewalk-service restart
----

> == Create New Certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Create and Replace CA and Server Certificates
```

> If you need to create entirely new certificates for an existing installation, you will need to delete the old certificates before you begin.

Reviewer: We should say that this is dangerous as it could happen that you by accident cut the trust chain from the clients to the server. If this happens, the admin need to login to every client and deploy the new CA there.

.Procedure: Creating New Certificates

. On the {productname} Server, at the command prompt, move the old certificate directory to a new location:
+
----
mv /root/ssl-build /root/old-ssl-build
----
. Generate a new CA certificate:
+
----
rhn-ssl-tool --gen-ca --dir="/root/ssl-build" --set-country="COUNTRY" \
--set-state="STATE" --set-city="CITY" --set-org="ORGANIZATION" \
--set-org-unit="ORGANIZATION UNIT" --set-common-name="SUSE Manager CA Certificate" \
--set-email="name@example.com"
----
. Generate a new server certificate:
+
----
rhn-ssl-tool --gen-server --dir="/root/ssl-build" --set-country="COUNTRY" \
--set-state="STATE" --set-city="CITY" --set-org="ORGANIZATION" \
--set-org-unit="ORGANIZATION UNIT" --set-email="name@example.com" \
--set-hostname="susemanager.example.top" --set-cname="example.com"
----
Ensure that the [systemitem]``set-cname`` parameter is the fully-qualified domain name of your {productname} Server.
You can use the the [systemitem]``set-cname`` parameter multiple times if you require multiple aliases.
. Generate the CA certificate RPM:
+
----
rhn-ssl-tool --gen-ca --rpm-only --dir="/root/ssl-build" \

> --from-ca-cert=`path_to_certificate_file`

Reviewer: I think this is not needed here. The commands above should automatically generate the RPMs.

----
. Generate the server certificate RPM:
+
----
rhn-ssl-tool --gen-server --rpm-only --dir="/root/ssl-build" \
--from-server-key=`path_to_server_key_file` \

> --from-server-cert=`path_to_server certificate_file`

Reviewer: I think this is not needed here. The commands above should automatically generate the RPMs.

----

> You will need to generate a server certificate RPM for each proxy, using their host names and cnames.

Reviewer: This could be a "Note" for step 3. The command of Step 3 is the one the customer should use to create new server certificates for the proxies.

----

When you have completed this procedure, you can deploy the new certificate on your clients.

.Procedure: Deploying Certificates on Traditional Clients

. On the client, create a new custom channel using these details:
+
* Name: SSL-CA-Channel
* Label: ssl-ca-channel
* Parent Channel: <choose the parent channel of a clients>
* Summary: SSL-CA-Channel

+
For more on creating custom channels, see xref:administration:channel-management.adoc[].
. Upload the CA certificate RPM to the channel:
+
----
rhnpush -c ssl-ca-channel --nosig \
--ca-chain=/srv/www/htdocs/pub/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT \
/root/combined-ssl-build/rhn-org-trusted-ssl-cert-1.0-2.noarch.rpm
----
. Subscribe all clients to the new ``SSL-CA-Channel`` channel.
. Install the CA certificate RPM on all clients by updating the channel.

.Procedure: Deploying Certificates on Salt Clients

// Does the above procedure also work for Salt? LKB 2019-09-10

. On the client, in the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Salt[Remote Commands].
. In the first field, enter [guimenu]``salt-call state.apply certs``.
In the second field, after the ``@``, enter [guimenu]``*``.

> Click btn:[Find Targets].

Reviewer: This is correct when you want to just deploy the new CA, but maybe we should just try out if a `highstate` on salt clients would do the same. I checked and the "certs" state is part of the highstate.

Author: Yeah, I was wondering about that.

Reviewer: I think we should change it and say 

. In the {productname} {webui} navigate to the Systems Overview Page and select all Salt Managed Clients into System Set Manager (SSM)
. Navigate to Systems => System Set Manager => Overview and select  `Apply system states`
. Apply the Highstate on all systems in the system set manager by clicking on the "Apply Highstate" button

. Check that the appropriate clients are displayed, and click btn:[Run Command] to deploy the certificates on the clients.

> image::deploy_cert_salt.png[scaledwidth=80%]

Reviewer: Hmm, there is the half missing.

- After the old and the new CA is trusted by every client the customer need to replace the server certificate on Server and Proxies.
- test if the connection to the clients are still working
- Deployed the CA file which has only the new Root CA on all clients
- Finally: update the CA Certificate in the Database

Author: Is this written up somewhere?

Reviewer: Yes, on the same wiki page where you got the other content😉

Look for section "Replace the Server Certificate on the Server and the Proxies" up to the end of the page .https://wiki.microfocus.com/index.php/SUSE_Manager/Replace_CA_Certificate

Author: :woman_facepalming:

[[custom-ssl]]
= Custom SSL Certificates

You can use custom certificates with {productname} and {productname} Proxy.

This section covers how to use a third party SSL certificate authority with a new {productname} installation, and replacing existing certificate with new custom certificates.

Before you begin, ensure you have:

* A certificate authority (CA) SSL public certificate
* An SSL server key
* An SSL server certificate

Your key and certificate files must be in PEM format.

The host name of the SSL keys and certificates must match the fully qualified host name of the machine you deploy them on.

> You can configure the host name of the certificate by editing the ``X509v3 Subject Alternative Name`` section of the certificate itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should set the host names in the ``X509v3 Subject Alternative Name`` section of the certificate.
```

"editing" sounds like you could use vi to change things, but certificates needs to be created using special tools.

----
Ensure that the [systemitem]``set-cname`` parameter is the fully-qualified domain name of your {productname} Server.
You can use the the [systemitem]``set-cname`` parameter multiple times if you require multiple aliases.
+
You will need to generate a server certificate RPM for each proxy, using their host names and cnames.

When you have new certificates, you can create the combined RPMs to authenticate the clients.

.Procedure: Create Combined Certificate RPMs

. Create a new CA file that combines the old and new certificate details, and generate a new RPM:
+
----
mkdir /root/combined-ssl-build
cp /root/old-ssl-build/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT /root/combined-ssl-build/
cat /root/ssl-build/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT >> /root/combined-ssl-build/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT
cp /root/old-ssl-build/*.rpm /root/combined-ssl-build/
rhn-ssl-tool --gen-ca --rpm-only --dir="/root/combined-ssl-build"
----
// I would like to split up these steps, I think. LKB 2019-09-10
. Deploy the CA certificate on the server:
+
----
/usr/bin/rhn-deploy-ca-cert.pl --source-dir /root/combined-ssl-build \
--target-dir /srv/www/htdocs/pub/ --trust-dir=/etc/pki/trust/anchors/
----

> When you have the combined RPMs, you can deploy the combined certificates to your clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have the combined RPMs, you can deploy the combined CA certificates to your clients.
```

. In the first field, enter [guimenu]``salt-call state.apply certs``.
In the second field, after the ``@``, enter [guimenu]``*``.
Click btn:[Find Targets].
. Check that the appropriate clients are displayed, and click btn:[Run Command] to deploy the certificates on the clients.

image::deploy_cert_salt.png[scaledwidth=80%]

When you have every client trusting both the old and new certificates, you can go ahead and replace the server certificate on the {productname} Server and Proxies.

.Procedure: Replace Server Certificate on the Server

. On the {productname} Server, at the command prompt, install the RPM from the [path]``ssl-build`` directory:
+
----
rpm -Uhv ssl-build/susemanager/rhn-org-httpd-ssl-key-pair-susemanager-1.0-2.noarch.rpm
----
. Restart services to pick the changes:
+
----
spacewalk-service restart
----

.Procedure: Replace Server Certificate on the Proxy

. On the {productname} Proxy, at the command prompt, install the RPM from the [path]``ssl-build`` directory:
+
----
rpm -Uhv ssl-build/susemanager-proxy/rhn-org-httpd-ssl-key-pair-susemanager-proxy-1.0-2.noarch.rpm
----
. Restart services to pick up the changes:
+
----

> spacewalk-service restart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rhn-proxy restart
```

For proxies we have a different command. And we do not have a symlink which name it mgr-proxy :-(

This is done by adding it to the client channels you set up previously.

.Procedure: Adding the New Certificates to the Client Channel

. Copy the combined certificate RPM into the [path]``/root/ssl-build/`` directory:
+
----
cp /root/combined-ssl-build/*.rpm /root/ssl-build/
----
. Generate a new RPM with from the new certificates.
Check the release number carefully to ensure you have the right certificate file:
+
----
rhn-ssl-tool --gen-ca --rpm-only --dir="/root/ssl-build"
----
. Install the new local certificates on the {productname} Server:
+
----
/usr/bin/rhn-deploy-ca-cert.pl --source-dir /root/ssl-build \
--target-dir /srv/www/htdocs/pub/ --trust-dir=/etc/pki/trust/anchors/
----
. Restart services to pick up the changes:
+
----
spacewalk-service restart
----
. Upload the new RPM into the channel:
+
----
rhnpush -c ssl-ca-channel --nosig \
--ca-chain=/srv/www/htdocs/pub/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT \
/root/ssl-build/rhn-org-trusted-ssl-cert-1.0-3.noarch.rpm
----

When you have the new certificate in the channel, you can use the {productname} {webui} to update it on all clients by synchronizing them with the channel.

> Alternatively, for Salt clients, you can use menu:Salt[Remote Commands].

Reviewer: Maybe you can reference the "Deploying Combined Certificates on Salt Clients" section.

> 

Reviewer: Proxies are here also "just clients", but there is one special thing. In `/srv/www/htdocs/pub/` there is a copy of 
the CA Certificate and the rpm which contains it. The should be replaced as well. Proxies should have the same content as the server when it comes to certifcates:

```
RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT
rhn-org-trusted-ssl-cert-*.noarch.rpm
```

You can set the host names in the ``X509v3 Subject Alternative Name`` section of the certificate.
You can also list multiple host names if your environment requires it.

If you want to use intermediate certificates, you need to merge the intermediate and root CA certificates into one file.
Ensure that the intermediate certificate comes first in the combined file.

== Custom Certificates for New Installations

By default, {productname} uses a self-signed certificate.
After you have completed the initial setup, you can replace the default certificate with a custom certificate.

.Procedure: Installing Custom Certificates on a New {productname} Server

. Install the {productname} Server according to the instructions in xref:installation:install-intro.adoc[].
. Complete the initial setup according to xref:installation:server-setup.adoc[].
. At the command prompt, point the SSL environment variables to the custom certificate file locations:
+
----
export CA_CERT=`path_to_CA_certificate_file`
export SERVER_KEY=`path_to_web_server_key`
export SERVER_CERT=`path_to_web_server_certificate`

> ----

Author: I've left the caps in, because the actual syntax requires the "quotes" and I didn't want to add more punctuation in. Replace the ``backticks`` with <pointy braces> though.

. Check all your Salt Clients to add them to the System Set Manager (SSM).
. Navigate to menu:Systems[System Set Manager > Overview].
. In the [guimenu]``States`` field, click btn:[Apply] to apply the system states.
. In the [guimenu]``Highstate`` page, click btn:[Apply Highstate] to propagate the changes to the clients.

When you have every client trusting both the old and new certificates, you can go ahead and replace the server certificate on the {productname} Server and Proxies.

.Procedure: Replace Server Certificate on the Server

. On the {productname} Server, at the command prompt, install the RPM from the [path]``ssl-build`` directory:
+
----
rpm -Uhv ssl-build/susemanager/rhn-org-httpd-ssl-key-pair-susemanager-1.0-2.noarch.rpm
----
. Restart services to pick the changes:
+
----
spacewalk-service restart
----

.Procedure: Replace Server Certificate on the Proxy

. On the {productname} Proxy, at the command prompt, install the RPM from the [path]``ssl-build`` directory:
+
----
rpm -Uhv ssl-build/susemanager-proxy/rhn-org-httpd-ssl-key-pair-susemanager-proxy-1.0-2.noarch.rpm
----
. Restart services to pick up the changes:
+
----

> rhn-proxy restart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
spacewalk-proxy restart
```

Just found out that we have a better alias which should be used here.

. Check that the appropriate clients are displayed, and click btn:[Run Command] to deploy the certificates on the clients.

image::deploy_cert_salt.png[scaledwidth=80%]

When you have every client trusting both the old and new certificates, you can go ahead and replace the server certificate on the {productname} Server and Proxies.

.Procedure: Replace Server Certificate on the Server

. On the {productname} Server, at the command prompt, install the RPM from the [path]``ssl-build`` directory:
+
----
rpm -Uhv ssl-build/susemanager/rhn-org-httpd-ssl-key-pair-susemanager-1.0-2.noarch.rpm
----
. Restart services to pick the changes:
+
----
spacewalk-service restart
----

.Procedure: Replace Server Certificate on the Proxy

. On the {productname} Proxy, at the command prompt, install the RPM from the [path]``ssl-build`` directory:
+
----
rpm -Uhv ssl-build/susemanager-proxy/rhn-org-httpd-ssl-key-pair-susemanager-proxy-1.0-2.noarch.rpm
----
. Restart services to pick up the changes:
+
----
spacewalk-service restart
----

> When you have replaced the server certificates on your server and any proxies, you need to update the certificate with only the new details all the clients.

Reviewer 2: Maybe, "_on_ all the clients".

Reviewer: Maybe we should add here, that the customer should "test" if the clients still operate correctly and can reach the server/proxies via SSL.
